Exercism is a wonderful site for practicing new languages, and installing it on a linux machine is quite simple. First, run "sudo apt-get install snapd" from terminal. This will give you the snap package. A snap is an object consisting of a program/tool and all of its various dependencies, meaning all of the things it needs to run. The idea of a snap is to allow you to install the snap instantly on most Linux distros, regardless of the particularities of your particular distro, and automatically get all the dependencies. Basically, it  makes installation as easy as it is on Windows or OSX.

Once you've installed snap, type "sudo snap install exercism" into your shell and run it. This will install Exercism on your machine. You can then get your token from the settings page on the Exercism site and type "exercism configure --token=<token>" to configure the Exercism CLI. It is possible at this step that Linux will complain that the folder containing Exercism is not included in the PATH environment variable, which means that the Exercism commands are not exposed for you to use in terminal. You can fix this by altering your PATH variable, but before we go modifying that variable, let's talk a little bit about what the Hell a path variable is, anyway. When you type the name of a program into shell, do you think that Linux looks through your whole hard drive to find a program with that name? Of course not. You've probably seen how long it takes something simple like Windows search to look through even a single large directory, let alone the entire hard drive. The path variable is, essentially, a list of directories where Linux looks for executables when you tell it to run a program. When you install vim, the executable for vim (or at least, a pointer to it) is added to a directory where the path variable is instructed to look. That way, when you type "vim" into your shell, Linux actually knows what to do. The problem that can arise when you install exercism is that the folder that Exercism goes into may or may not be included in the PATH variable, and if it's not, then terminal has no idea what you're talking about when you type "exercism blahblahblah". To make sure that the terminal understands you, you need to explicitly include the proper directory, because Exercism is not judicious about finding the right place on your computer to go.

To see what's already in your PATH variable, simply type "echo $PATH" into your shell. This will display something like the following:

folder1/subfolder/subsubfolder:folder2/subfolder/subsubfolder/folder3:folder4/subfolder/

It's a list of directories separated by colons. To add another directory path to the list, simply type "export PATH=$PATH:/whatever/directory/you/want". Linux installs of Exercism typically go into /snap/bin (if Exercism was installed via snap versus, say, being built from source), so PATH=$PATH:/snap/bin will do the trick. After you do this, you can begin using Exercism commands.
